to discuss splitting the wood evenly and
to get our parts out of the log with
some sort of control there's really a
basic concept that you need to
understand and that concept is about
deflection Dave Sawyer help me
understand this basically what it comes
down to is this this this piece here if
we were trying to split off this little
part right here on the side well it's
quite obvious that as I pull on this
it's going to break and it's going to
break outward in that direction okay but
the real thing that's happening here is
that there's an uneven deflection
happening when we do bend it in other
words this part even if I pull on it
isn't bending or deflecting as much as
this
therefore the split will run that way
okay so basically if I pull on them
evenly it's still going to run out that
side and you can see this is going to
pull right off and that's really what we
try and control and affect while doing
our splitting with the fro in the mall
I've now put the fro into our workpiece
and split it relatively evenly and I
want to do this to describe exactly what
the fro does which is to exert a certain
amount of leverage to try and even up
that deflection that we were talking
about before so you can see if I pull
the fro this way notice which part is
actually doing the bending which part
deflects it's this part right here and
it's a pretty simple reason for that
that is when I pull this way there's a
fulcrum right here and that fulcrum is
the only part that's actually touching
this piece now the fulcrum is here but
the lever ends up being way up on this
piece so that distance that difference
between this much on this side and
nothing on that side is what applies
more force to the side now if I reverse
that and I go the other way notice what
happens it's the other piece that bends
the other side of the split okay that's
really what we can use to help control
the split because the throw itself has a
built-in leverage effect now as we can
see looking at this piece this side over
here looks a little bit thinner than
that side so we're going to expect that
this is the weaker side and the split is
going to want to run out that direction
so knowing what we now know about the
left
factor given to us by the pro what I'm
going to do is I'm going to work pulling
this direction to try and get an even
deflection so I want this even curvature
coming down if that curve is even the
way they both go in there that split
will run completely straight so I'm
going to just leave it this way and we
want to hear a slight little tinkling
sound a little bit of a sound there that
doesn't sound like a branch breaking see
and it just sort of unzips right down
the line because what's happening is
once again that deflection is even as it
goes in so this sort of answers the
question most folks have trouble with
which is which side should be down in
the equation which side you pull against
well you're always pulling against the
heavier side because you're attempting
to make it Bend as much as the lighter
side now besides the leverage that you
can exert with the fro itself there's
one other way that you can actually help
to control the split to create that even
deflection we're talking about one way
would be to put my hand here and pull
that's tight enough to pull against this
to try and create more Bend they're just
using weight okay that that can really
help out if things are relatively even
another method that I've employed quite
often and find to be very useful is to
actually support the lighter side and if
you can do this what it does is it
pushes more of the deflection to the
heavy side because the light side can't
move quite so much here given all that
we've discussed I'm going to try and
split a smaller portion off of this wide
piece here and I'm going to use my fro
and some good leverage and hopefully be
able to split off let's say one-third of
this piece and have it go right down the
fiber line so clearly as I Drive this in
you can see that it's an uneven mass
here so it's definitely going to want to
run out this direction because this
little thin piece is going to deflect
more but if I can apply some force
supporting it and use the leverage of
the fro I can probably get it to run
somewhat straighter
you'll also notice that I'm not being
too fast about this because I want the
forces to be able to be affected by the
leverage and not just be blown by
excessive speed and force there all
right not too bad
it may have run just a little bit in
that direction but you can see by the
length of this fiber right here that
that comes down the middle that indeed I
follow the fiber line pretty well and
that's really what we're trying to do is
follow the fiber line that's going to
keep the strength in the tree and that
way when we go to bend it or sit in it
we don't have to worry about it breaking
because we've got those nice long fibers
intact